# dry_tortugas
Quantification of histological disease signs in corals from Dry Tortugas National Park


Quantitative histopathology investigates symbiont to vacuole ratio (a proportion that gives insight to free space in the vacuole housing the algal symbiont, a stress indicator), proportion exocytosis (how many symbionts are free-floating in the gastrodermis without vacuoles), size of symbiont (cannot determine between symbiont genera at light microscopy level but signs of swelling and shrinking can be extrapolated), and gastrodermal separation (where the gastrodermis pulls away from the mesoglea, can indicate stress and disease). Secondary quantitative analysis can aid in understanding the context between intensity and consistency of necrosis, vacuolization, exocytosis, degraded symbionts, and gastrodermal separation. This analysis goes a step further than presence/absence of disease signs by noting how intense they are when they are seen (intensity), and how often they are seen across five slides, regardless of intensity (consistency). 

This study is unique in itself as corals are shown to recover from disease which is unusual in the case of SCTLD, but also provides for a broader reach. Samples collected for histology in this project were analyzed with the same methodology as samples across two (potentially three) other diseases and three other locations. This approach allows researchers to visually assess tissue parameters without any internal bias for their own data and compare to other diseases across other regions. This has the potential to create a bank of knowledge across users for a faster verification of disease state. As the body of data grows, so will the verification. Moving these data and the methodology behind it allows for streamlining these techniques across labs.

Moving forward, this technique could be applied to outplanting and ex situ facilities, marking what new “healthy” colonies look like, how species differ from one another, and potentially in the future, how tissue markers change seasonally and over time. 
